# Github Actions Notes

## Concepts
- Workflow: a configurable automated process that will run one or more jobs when triggered. It is defined by a YMAL file stored in .github/workflows. The YMAL file specifies events that trigger the workflow, defines jobs and specifies steps to run within each job. However, the YMAL itself does not store executable code. Instead, it references executable code in the repository or external actions. A repository can have multiple workflows. A workflow can be triggered by an event, by a schedule, by posting to a REST API, or manually. 
- Event: an activity in a repository that triggers a workflow run.
- Job: a set of steps. Each job runs inside its own runner. Jobs can run paprallel by default or be configured to run sequentially. However, steps inside a job are always run sequentially.
- Runner: an isolated environment that executes the steps of a job defined in a workflow. A runner could be a virtual machine (VM), a container (such as a Docker container), or even your own physical machine. Wherever your runner is located, the code to execute is still the same - it just needs to be executed somewhere. The code doesn't care where it gets executed.
    - GitHub-Hosted Runner: GitHub Actions will always provision a seperate VM for each job. You may choose to run job steps directly in a VM, or the VM can run a container which executes your code. Once again, GitHub Actions will always create an independent VM for every single job.
    - Self-Hosted Runner: could be your on-premises infrastructure, or web services. If it's a VM or a physical machine, you will need to install the GitHub Actions runner software to register the machine as a self-hosted runner. If it's a container, then the container should run the software so it is recognised as a self-hosted runner.
- Step: a step is either a shell script or an action. Since a job is a set of steps and each job is assigned one runner, naturally all steps in the same job also run in the same runner in order. These steps can share data with each other since they are in the same runner.
- Action: an action is a small, self-contained piece of software designed to perform a complex but frequently repeated task within a CI/CD workflow. You can write your own actions, or find them in the GitHub Marketplace.
